Project Details
Project Name
FNN Safeguard
Project Title
FNN Safeguard: Verified Recovery Points and Pre-Upgrade Qualification for Fiber Nodes
One-Line Description
FNN Safeguard is a self-hosted operator tool that verifies Fiber node backups, stores encrypted copies off-host, tests restores in an isolated environment, and checks a target FNN version against cloned node state before a live upgrade.

Project Summary
Fiber Network Node already supports online backups, restore procedures, and database migrations. However, the existence of a backup directory does not prove that the backup is complete, recoverable, stored away from the live disk, compatible with a target FNN version, or usable during a real recovery event.
FNN Safeguard turns FNN’s existing backup capability into a verifiable operational workflow:
Inspect node
→ create or discover official FNN backup
→ validate backup contents
→ generate recovery manifest
→ encrypt and replicate off-host
→ restore inside an isolated environment
→ verify identity and state
→ qualify a target FNN release
→ generate PASS / WARN / BLOCK report
The tool is intended for operators running persistent or funded Fiber nodes, including public routing nodes, merchant nodes, CCH services, trampoline nodes, and development teams maintaining long-lived FNN deployments.
It does not replace FNN’s backup implementation. It independently verifies whether a specific operator’s backup and upgrade path actually work.

Problem Being Solved
FNN v0.9.0 automatically creates online backups and can trigger an immediate backup through its admin RPC. A native backup contains the Fiber database checkpoint, encrypted CKB key, and Fiber node identity key. However, the configuration file and FIBER_SECRET_KEY_PASSWORD are not included, and backups are stored on the same disk as the live database unless an operator manually moves them elsewhere.
The official recovery process also contains operational risk. The current documentation describes a manual permission workaround for restoring into an initialized v0.9.0 directory, and the current restore path directly copies the backed-up key files over the existing files.
A backup may therefore exist without proving that:
The database checkpoint is readable.
Both required key files are present.
The operator still has the required password.
The configuration corresponds to the backup.
The backup exists on another device or host.
The restored node has the expected public identity.
The target FNN version can open or migrate the database.
Channel and payment records remain structurally consistent.
The restored clone is prevented from joining the live Fiber network.
A real restore problem has already been documented where an existing read-only Fiber identity file prevents fnn --restore from completing before the database and channel-recovery steps run.
The operational gap is therefore:
FNN creates backups, but operators still lack an independent system that proves a backup is usable and that a target release can safely process a clone of their node state before production deployment.

Proposed Solution
FNN Safeguard will provide a headless CLI and Docker-based isolation environment with five core capabilities.
1. Node Inspection
Command:
fnn-safeguard inspect
The command collects a non-secret inventory of the running node:
FNN version and commit
Network
Node public key
Storage backend and paths
Configuration checksum
Channel counts by state
Payment and invoice record counts
Latest backup timestamp
Backup age
Off-host replication status
Last successful restore drill
Last qualified FNN target version
Example:
Node public key:        03ab...91ef
FNN version:            v0.9.0
Network:                mainnet
Ready channels:         12
Stale channels:         0
Latest recovery point:  18 minutes ago
Off-host copy:          Verified
Last restore drill:     6 days ago
Recovery status:        PASS
The report must never contain private keys, passwords, full Biscuit tokens, or sensitive configuration values.

2. Verified Recovery-Point Creation
Command:
fnn-safeguard backup --verify
The workflow should:
1. Call FNN’s official backup RPC or locate a completed official backup.
2. Wait for the timestamped backup directory to finish.
3. Verify the presence and readability of the database, CKB key, and Fiber key.
4. Record the node identity, network, FNN version, and configuration checksum.
5. Hash the backup files.
6. Generate a machine-readable recovery manifest.
7. Encrypt the recovery point with an established tool.
8. Replicate it to an off-host storage target.
9. Download or re-read the remote copy and verify its checksum.
10. Apply a retention policy.
Example manifest:
{
  "format_version": 1,
  "node_public_key": "03ab...91ef",
  "network": "mainnet",
  "fnn_version": "0.9.0",
  "fnn_commit": "e6cb7ac...",
  "created_at": "2026-09-07T12:00:00Z",
  "database_present": true,
  "fiber_key_present": true,
  "ckb_key_present": true,
  "config_checksum": "sha256:...",
  "bundle_checksum": "sha256:...",
  "off_host_copy_verified": true
}
The project should use established encryption and storage tooling such as Restic, age, S3-compatible object storage, or a remote filesystem. It should not implement custom cryptography.

3. Isolated Restore Drill
Command:
fnn-safeguard drill --backup latest
The tool restores a selected recovery point inside a temporary isolated environment.
The drill should:
Create a temporary Docker or namespace-based environment.
Block Fiber P2P connectivity from the cloned node.
Restore the backup into a separate data directory.
Use the same FNN version that created the backup.
Start the restored database in validation mode.
Verify the restored node public key.
Compare channel, payment, and invoice inventories with the manifest.
Record restore duration and failures.
Destroy the isolated environment after the report is generated.
Example result:
Backup completeness:     PASS
Restore command:         PASS
Database opened:         PASS
Node identity:           MATCH
Expected channels:       12
Restored channels:       12
Expected payments:       207
Restored payments:       207
Fiber P2P egress:        BLOCKED
Restore duration:        46 seconds
Recovery point status:   VERIFIED
The report must not claim that restored channels are immediately spendable. FNN may mark risk-bearing restored channels as Stale, after which peer-assisted auditing may still be required.

4. Target-Release Qualification
Command:
fnn-safeguard qualify --target v0.9.1
The tool should test a target FNN binary against a cloned recovery point before the operator upgrades the live node.
It should:
Clone the latest verified recovery point.
Record the source FNN version and database state.
Run the target binary only against the clone.
Permit migration only within the temporary environment.
Block Fiber P2P participation.
Capture migration, startup, and error output.
Compare node identity and state inventories before and after.
Detect missing records, startup failures, permission errors, and unexpected state changes.
Generate a PASS, WARN, or BLOCK result.
Example:
Source version:          v0.9.0
Target version:          v0.9.1
Database migration:      PASS
Node identity:           MATCH
Channel inventory:       MATCH
Payment inventory:       MATCH
Unexpected record loss:  None detected
Post-migration warning:  2 channels marked Stale
Qualification result:    WARN
The claim must remain precise:
This qualifies a target binary against one operator’s cloned state. It does not certify that the release is universally safe or free from all protocol defects.

5. Safe Upgrade Plan
Command:
fnn-safeguard plan-upgrade --target v0.9.1
The generated plan should include:
Latest verified recovery point
Off-host-copy status
Restore-drill result
Target qualification result
Required migration path
Expected downtime
Configuration changes
Manual operator confirmations
Post-upgrade checks
Rollback boundary
Example blocked result:
UPGRADE BLOCKED

Reason:
The latest backup has not passed an isolated restore drill.

Required action:
fnn-safeguard drill --backup latest
Example ready result:
UPGRADE READY WITH WARNINGS

Verified recovery point: PASS
Off-host copy:            PASS
Target migration:         PASS
Identity comparison:      MATCH

Warning:
Two channels entered Stale during the cloned migration test.
Monitor peer-assisted channel auditing after the live upgrade.

Product Boundary
Included
Native FNN v0.9.x support
Linux and Docker deployments
Official FNN backup discovery and triggering
Backup completeness verification
Recovery manifests and checksums
Encrypted off-host replication
Retention policy
Isolated restore drills
State-specific target-release qualification
PASS / WARN / BLOCK reports
CLI and JSON output
Docker and systemd packaging
Operator documentation
Explicitly Excluded
Automatic live rollback
Automatic production upgrades
Automatic force closure
Automatic replacement of active channel state
Hosted custody of users’ backups or keys
Custom encryption algorithms
A full Fiber node manager
Payment or channel-management dashboard
Liquidity automation
LSP operation
CCH orchestration
Wallet permission sessions
Windows or macOS desktop support in Phase 1
Universal release certification
Guaranteed fund recovery
Automatic live rollback must remain out of scope because restoring an older payment-channel state after the node has processed new activity can introduce serious state and penalty risk.

Non-Duplication
FNN Safeguard does not duplicate FiberGuard Session or Clasp. Those systems deal with permissions between applications and Fiber nodes. FNN Safeguard deals with backup validity, recovery, and release qualification.
It also does not duplicate Fiber Studio. Fiber Studio is a graphical desktop application that manages a local node, payments, channels, updates, and migrations. FNN Safeguard is a headless server-operator tool whose core function is isolated restore verification and cloned-state upgrade qualification. Fiber Studio already includes an upgrade dialog and backup guidance, so FNN Safeguard must not grow into another desktop node manager.
It does not replace FNN’s built-in backup functionality. FNN remains responsible for producing the database checkpoint and key backup. FNN Safeguard verifies, replicates, restores, and qualifies that recovery point.

Target Users
Public Fiber routing-node operators
Merchant-operated Fiber nodes
CCH and cross-chain service operators
Trampoline and liquidity-node operators
Wallet teams running persistent backend FNN nodes
Developers maintaining long-lived testnet or mainnet deployments

Recommended Technical Stack
Primary language: Rust or Go
CLI: clap for Rust or Cobra for Go
FNN integration: JSON-RPC 2.0
Isolation: Docker, network namespaces, or rootless Podman
Encrypted backup: Restic and/or age
Off-host storage: S3-compatible storage and local/SSH filesystem
Reports: JSON plus human-readable terminal output
State: SQLite
Packaging: Docker image, standalone binary, systemd service/timer
Testing: integration tests using FNN binaries and disposable node directories
Rust provides stronger alignment with FNN’s implementation ecosystem, while Go may simplify the operator tooling and process orchestration. Either is acceptable, but the difficult Fiber-specific validation logic must not be delegated entirely to shell scripts.

Recommended Timeline and Budget
Timeline: 10 weeks
Recommended request: $9,800 equivalent in CKB
Suggested allocation:
Milestone
Duration
Budget
Node inspection and recovery manifests
2 weeks
$2,200
Verified encrypted off-host recovery points
3 weeks
$2,600
Isolated restore drills
3 weeks
$3,000
Target-release qualification and packaging
2 weeks
$2,000
Total
10 weeks
$9,800


Objective Completion Criteria
The funded project is complete when:
1. The tool can identify or trigger an official FNN backup.

2. It rejects a backup missing the database or either required key file.

3. It generates a versioned recovery manifest without secrets.

4. It encrypts and copies the recovery point to an off-host target.

5. It verifies the copied recovery point after upload.

6. It restores the selected backup in an isolated environment.

7. The restored clone cannot participate in Fiber P2P networking.

8. The restored node public key matches the expected identity.

9. Channel, payment, and invoice inventories are compared.

10. A target FNN v0.9.x binary can be tested against cloned state.

11. Unexpected migration or state differences produce WARN or BLOCK.

12. Passwords, keys, and tokens do not appear in reports, logs, URLs, or CI artifacts.

13. The workflow produces both JSON and human-readable reports.

14. At least two independently operated testnet nodes complete a pilot.

15. No automatic live rollback or production-state replacement is implemented.

Brief MVP / Pre-Submission Plan
The MVP should prove the difficult Fiber-specific workflow before the grant is submitted.
MVP Scope
Build only these commands:
fnn-safeguard inspect
fnn-safeguard backup --verify
fnn-safeguard drill --backup latest
MVP Tasks
1. Node inspection
Connect to a local FNN v0.9.0 RPC.
Read node identity, network, version, channels, payments, and invoices.
Generate a sanitized inventory report.
Hash the active configuration without printing secrets.
2. Backup verification
Trigger the official FNN admin backup RPC or detect the latest backup.
Confirm that db/, key, and sk exist and are readable.
Reject incomplete backups.
Generate a JSON recovery manifest with checksums.
3. Isolated restore drill
Copy the backup into a temporary Docker environment.
Disable or firewall Fiber P2P egress.
Restore using the appropriate FNN binary.
Safely handle the existing read-only-key restore condition.
Start the restored database without connecting the cloned node to peers.
4. Identity and state comparison
Confirm that the restored public key matches the source node.
Compare channel, payment, and invoice counts.
Produce PASS, WARN, or FAIL.
Show exact evidence for every result.
5. Security checks
Verify that keys and passwords never appear in logs.
Verify that the cloned node cannot connect to Fiber peers.
Delete the temporary restore environment after the test.
Add negative tests for missing files, wrong password, corrupt database, and identity mismatch.
6. External validation
Run the MVP against your own FNN testnet node.
Obtain two external operators willing to run it locally.
Collect only sanitized reports; operators must not send you their key files or private backups.
Publish the anonymized results in the proposal.
MVP Success Output
Official FNN backup:        FOUND
Backup completeness:        PASS
Manifest generated:         PASS
Database restore:           PASS
Node identity comparison:   MATCH
Channel inventory:          MATCH
Payment inventory:          MATCH
Fiber P2P egress:           BLOCKED
Secrets in logs:            NONE DETECTED
Recovery drill result:      VERIFIED
Once this workflow works against at least two independently operated nodes, the proposal becomes credible enough to submit at the recommended scope and budget.

